(upbeat music)
All right in this video we're gonna learn
all about debugging.
There's kinda like 2 parts of debugging.
There's tools that you can use to like get some good info
as to what happened and when things go wrong.
And then there's sort of a mindset of like
"How do I tackle this thing?"
"How do I be a good problem solver?"
So, this video's gonna be all about the tools
and then what I hope you're gonna learn
over the next
the rest of the course is
anytime we start to hit a roadblock,
I'm not gonna cut it out of the video.
I'm gonna leave it in
and sort of show you my though process
as to "huh, this doesn't work."
I'm gonna sort of step through what my process would be
to figuring out why it went wrong.
So what I want you to do
is go into your exercise folder.
There's a folder 16 debugging
and then inside of that
there is a debugging start.js
and a debugging.html.
If you look at the debugging html,
pretty simple.
We load up our base css.
I have a button that says Make Me Bigger.
Then I'm loading in this debugging.js.
That doesn't exist yet.
What I need you to do is go ahead and save a copy
of this as just debugging.js.
Now this debugging is gonna contain
a bunch of stuff we haven't learned yet.
This is what's called an array of objects.
This is a loop.
These are some functions, there's doctorize.
You probably know what these do.
This is some button event listener.
It doesn't matter that we don't know what these do yet.
This is a fetch function.
I'll explain what they do,
and then we'll learn about how to build our own.
This is just more so that
we can get into the different types of debugging.
So let's start at the probably the most basic
and that is your console methods
are gonna be helpful for learning how they all work.
So there's obviously console.log.
That's probably the most common one you see.
I'm using console log here.
Let's go into this people.forEach.
Which usually gives you like a little
question mark there.
Looks like it's not there anymore.
Usually it gives you a little eye and a circle.
So that one doesn't do really anything all that different.
There's console.error
now this is not for actually throwing errors
or handling errors.
We're gonna learn about that.
This just changes what it looks like
in the consoles.
So often like,
maybe if you were to tell a person like,
if the person.name is equal to "Wes"
then consoles.error "Dumb name".
Now you just see Dumb name!
And it will...
It will both give you the sorta UI
as well as it tells you,
gives you this which is called a stack trace.
We'll learn about that in just a second.
When we get to this call stack thing here.
There's console.warn which is very similar.
Just gives you the exact same thing but
without the exclamation mark instead of
an actual error UI.
There is console.table
I really like that one so,
let's go down here.
Console.table and we have all these people.
Any time you have a list of objects,
and the objects have the same property,
meaning that this one has a name.
A cool and a country.
Console.table will format it in a nice little table.
That you have there.
I like that a lot.
Be able to peer into the data that you have.
Really easily.
There is console.count so,
if we were to...
Lets go into this doctorize,
and let's just say that console.count
"running Doctorize"
and you wanted to know like how many times
is this function actually being run.
So if I go in here and I run doctorize.
Wes.
Running doctorize,
one,
two,
three,
four.
So every time I run that console.count
what passing at the string of running doctorize.
That will show me the info.
That can be helpful for maybe sometimes you have
a function that's accidentally running twice
or you don't know like,
sometimes you are working with like
hover elements and it's triggering
way to often.
Console.count will show you how many times it's,
it's running.
Similarly I think you can also
pass invariables so,
if we were to change this to back ticks.
Running doctorize for name.
And now if I were to run docterize.
Says running doctorize for wes 1.
Doctorize for wes 2.
Bur if I were to then change that to 'snickers'.
That goes back to 1,
and then if I run wes again it still maintains that.
So it's based on what strings you pass to console.count.
Next one we have is console.group
that can be helpful if you've got
a whole bunch of like stuff to console.logs
so let's get rid of this.
Or I'll comment that out.
Make a function here.
Function 'doalotofstuff'.
And what you can do is say console.group
and you can say 'doing some stuff'.
And then inside of here you can do as many
console logs as you want like,
'hey I'm one' console.warn
'watch out!'
console.log or maybe error.
'hey'
you get the point.
And then we finish it off with
console.groupEnd
and then you pass it the same string
that you've used to open your group.
Which is here.
And now when we run that.
Do a lot of stuff.
What it does is it groups together
all of these console logs into like,
a nice little collapsible thing.
And I find that helpful so it like,
if you were going up to this people.forEach.
Let's go and clear that out.
We could say console.group and say
'starting person.name.'
and then we could-
let's just do groupEnd immediately.
I'll say...
Oh maybe we'll just use the persons name,
we don't need starting cause that will show it.
So console.group,
persons name,
and then inside of that we can
console.log person.country,
console.log the person.cool,
console log. Done.
And now when we refresh that,
what you see is that because we looped over
all three of these people.
We've nicely tied them into wes,
Scott and Snickers,
and you can actually even group collapsed.
And that will by default collapse them.
I find that really helpful when
I'm looping over lots of data.
The console can become a very cluttered space.
And it's nice to just tuck them into
their own little groups.
And let's say I'm having trouble with Scott,
I'm gonna open it up and then you
can actually look at the data.
So I find that one to be particularly helpful
when you're doing lots and lots of logging.
So that's all the different console methods out there.
I think there's a couple other ones,
but those are the ones that I use myself.
Quite a bit.
When I'm trying to debug something.
I'm just gonna console comment these out.
Next thing we need to talk about is
something called the call stack
or the stack trace.
The stack trace will tell you what function called.
What function called.
What function.
So if I have this function down here called Go.
And that function in turn,
we'll call doctorize which will
first call greet.
So there's a kind of a lot going on here.
And you'll notice of greet we have this function
that doesn't exist.
And that will cause an error.
Let's go ahead and run that from our console here.
So go.
You see uncaught reference error 'doesntExist'
is not defined okay.
And then you start to see this.
And I think a lot of new developers
look at this and they go "eugh it's a lot of numbers,
and parenthesis and anonymous 1:1 what does that even mean?
So they sort of just ignore.
But like this is where the good stuff is in an error.
If you wanna know what went wrong.
You have to get good at reading these call stacks.
And it's pretty simple,
it just says,
okay it happened here at greet.
On debugging.js on line 47.
Okay so it happened on line 47.
Okay good.
That's where the actual error happened.
But errors aren't always that easy.
You might say okay,
but like how did that happen,
who called greet.
Well you go into the next piece of the call stack.
Okay at go.
So go ended up calling the greet function.
And that was at line 52 so go to line 52.
And here is the go that's where greet
actually got called.
And then it says at anonymous 1:1
what does that mean?
That means just cause I ran it from
my actual console.
If I were to make another function called
function bootstrap.
And that in turn called go.
Make this console log.
Starting the app.
Now If I were to run bootstrap.
You'll see that the error was in greet,
which was called by go,
which was called by bootstrap.
Which was called by an anonymous function meaning
I ran that from the console here.
Right.
And if I were to just run bootstrap.
On the page load.
You see that when I refresh the
page now that immediately happens.
And then it tells me the error was at greet,
which was called by go,
which was called by bootstrap,
which was run on line 61 on here.
So being able to read your callstacks as they
go from one file to another is
going to be extremely important.
And we're gonna be using that quite abit in this course.
So I'm gonna comment out this running of the bootstrap.
Everything looks good.
Next thing we want to learn about is...
The grabbing of elements.
So this is just like-
kind of a handy little one that I like to use quite abit.
Is if you're on a website and you're like inspecting it,
like lets take this button right here.
Actually let's go to a website that has more buttons.
Lets go to MDN.
Let's take this input for an example right here.
I wanna know what's going on with this input.
So if I were to select that with my dev tools.
So you click on this one and you can hover over them.
You wanna select it,
there's an input and I can just
type in like 'hey' inside of it.
And what is selected right here in my dev tools
is blue and then if I flip over to the
console tab right here.
Just gonna clear it out.
If you type $0 what that will do
is it will return to you whatever you
currently have selected in the elements tab.
And that can be really helpful
because you can do things like call like,
.value against it.
And it will tell you what I've typed inside of it.
So I use that all the time where I'm like,
I don't wanna have to select the thing,
or make a global variable.
I just select the element in the elements tab.
And then go to console and type in $0
and that's going to give you sort of a
Short-cut access to the actual element.
(muffled) You might wondering what does 0 mean?
That means the last element clicked.
So if I were to go back here and
hover other top of this...
Submit button.
Well it's actually offscreen.
They've hidden it but...
If I were to click on it.
And go back to console and type $0 again.
You see that this is the button that we selected.
And if I typed $1 it gives us the input.
So what happens it says $0 is the last element you clicked.
On here.
$1 is the second last element you clicked.
And you can keep going forever.
If I lets,
lets click on another element here.
So this span.
So $0 should now that's span.
$1 should now be the button and
$2 should now be the input.
I'm not sure how far it goes but
that definitely can be handy to sort of
have a little bit of memory of
what elements you ended up clicking.
So those are the $0 $1 $2.
A kinda another cool thing you can do
is we have $ and $$.
And these are only in the console.
You can't use these things in your code.
This is only when you're running in the console.
And what these are are -
oh it looks like this one,
if Jquery is loaded on the page this won't work.
So we need to find a website.
Is Jquery on here?
Yeah this page has Jquery loaded on it.
So we need to go to another.
Maybe let's go to Apple.com
open up at this,
and if you say $,
there we go.
And $$.
So what these are,
are sorta short hand selectors for two things
we're gonna learn about in a coming video,
about the DOM.
And that will allow us to select things,
like based on the selectors.
So $ 'p' will give us document.queryselector
and that will match the first thing
that matches the selector here.
And then $$ will match all of the ones
that match selector so,
in this case it's found the first paragraph tag.
And then in this case it found all of
the paragraph tags on the page.
So I find those to be very helpful.
We'll even look about how can you
replicate this functionality.
This has nothing to do with Jquery.
It's just kind of a little short hand
that's available to you in the console.
Let's talk about break points.
That's the,
sort of the next big one that we have here.
Let's go in to our people.forEach,
get rid of all this console here.
Let's just console.log the person.name
and go back to debugging.
And you see everyone's name.
What you can do is in here if you wanna sort of
pause javascript from running.
Is you can type 'debugger' and then add :
and that is a statement that only when
your dev tools are open,
it will actually pause javascript from running.
And it allows us to sort of peer into
javascript at that very moment.
So now when I refresh.
What happens is we've set what's called a break point.
Break at this certain time and,
it's kinda cool because this will give you
a whole bunch of information as to what happened.
And I'm gonna try to do my best,
I might have to zoom out here a little bit.
So if you hover over it,
it actually shows you what the variables are equal to.
You'll see that the javascript has paused.
If we go to our console nothing is logged just yet.
We'll go back to the sources tab here.
And then on this right hand side,
this is where all of the different tools
for inspecting what's going on is happening here.
So first it gives us our call stack.
We talked about that earlier.
Second it's gonna tell you what our local variables are.
That's coming next in our scope video but,
you can see really quickly here
that we've got two parameters here;
we have person,
and we have index.
And if you either look here,
you can see what they are or you can
either just hover over top of them.
And you can see what the person variable is set to.
There's other stuff for break points,
we'll get into there in just a second.
But what's kinda cool is you can
either click the play button,
and what happened there if we go back to our console.
Look it,
console logged Wes and then it hit the debugger
again because it's a loop.
And now you see the person is equal to Scott.
The index is equal to 1.
There's other information about the 'this' keyword,
we'll learn about that in coming videos.
And we can start of like,
keep going with it.
We can step over into the next function call so,
you see what I did right there is,
when you hit play that will just
keep running javascript until it hits
the next debugger.
If you hit this one,
step over into next function call,
What it will do is allow you to
run the code line by line.
So here I am.
It doesn't say Wes yet.
But if I keep pressing-
you can press the arrow up here too.
Next line...
Did it get console logged?
Yeah Scott got consoled logged.
Next line.
You can just sort of like step through the javascript.
And you can see how the browser is actually
gonna go ahead and run it so,
when console log becomes a little bit overwhelming.
When you feel like your console logging
too much data in order to see it,
or if you feel like you're trying to
console log something quickly
just so you could see what happened in the past.
Popping a debugger in there,
and those can go in anywhere,
I could just...
Pop them up right here.
And refresh the page.
And you'll see that there are
no variables available to us.
But I could step into it.
Now you can see there's no variables.
No you can see that I stepped over that creation here.
Now we have this people variable
which has all our data in it.
It's just a handy way to sorta slow things down,
and be able to peer into what
the different pieces of data are.
You can also set break points
from the browser as well,
so if I take that debugger out.
Everything works just fine.
But you can go into your sources tab.
In the side bar here you'll be able to
click on your actual javascript that you have.
This is obviously open,
you can click through to other ones here.
And you can say like,
Okay...
When someone runs this go function,
I wanna put a break point in there.
And what I just did there is I just
clicked on the line number,
and now when I refresh the page.
You'll see that that actually has stopped a break point.
And when I refresh the page,
you see the break point is still there.
Now if I were to go ahead and run that function,
you see that it pauses itself in debugger.
We can see...
Look at this.
The name is not (cough)
you can see it's paused itself in the debugger
and we have all of the exact same info that we were,
were looking at earlier.
So break points you can either click on the line
from the sources tab or,
you can pop the word debugger anywhere in your javascript.
Just make sure you actually remove those
(laughs)
I once forgot a debugger command in,
which is not a big deal because like,
if you refresh the page.
And there's no dev tools open.
It won't do anything.
The browser will just ignore them.
But I was working on a developer focused website,
which many developers have their dev tools open by default.
And that was a bad day so we to quickly take it out.
So make sure you remove all of those.
We talked about scope.
Scope will allow us to sorta peer into what variables are.
We'll look a little bit more into that
in the next video.
Next one is network requests.
If you wanna see like what is being fired off.
If you open up your dev tools.
And you got to your network tab.
And you refresh.
You're gonna see what's happening here is,
you see all of the different files
that were needed in order for this thing to work.
So we have our debugging.html,
we have our base.css,
this is all the CSS that I've made this
blue and pink button.
We've got our debugging.js
and then we have a SVG which is this
little wavy pattern in the background here.
And this can be really helpful because
you can actually see when a website
is sending out data for you so
I've got this little function right here
called fetchDadJoke.
And that's just gonna go off to some
API and grab a dad joke.
We'll worry about what is async and all this,
what does this mean,
in the future we're gonna learn all about that.
But for now just know that it goes
to an external API and grabs a dad joke.
If I were to run that dad joke function here.
IT brings us back a dad joke.
What did the scarf say to the hat?
You go on ahead,
I am going to hang around here a bit longer.
Oh my gosh.
So if we go to our network here
you'll see that there's this new
item that's been logged here.
I can click on that and you can see
information about the actual request.
Like what happened?
It's probably all not that useful to you.
But you can see what the raw response
was and a preview of it.
This is gonna be helpful when we
look at Json.
Also gives you information about like,
how long did this request take?
So if you're like "huh this website is slow".
It'll actually tell you where the time was spent
in fetching that dad joke.
Took a 133 milliseconds.
And most of that was spent in waiting
for the dad joke API to actually return the data to us.
And very little of that was actually
us sending the request out.
So that's helpful.
I really like using that like if you go to Apple.com,
and you go to your network tab and you refresh.
You can see there's like literally
100's of things that get requested here.
Little American flag icon.
Apple arcade.
You can also filter them here for XHR;
That's when their sending data out about you.
So here are there some suggestions.
Find a store.
This is just some data,
somewhere on the website they needed this.
Locale switcher.
Sometimes when you like hover over things
they start sending data off.
Showing that ooh this persons interested in it.
Take a quick search.
Maybe I search for iPad,
yeah you see that these suggestions start popping up.
So I just typed in iPad.
Now it comes back with a list of suggestions.
Here we go.
The results iPad Pro,
iPad Air, regular iPad, iPad mini, iPad accessories.
And you see that's the data that was
actually returned and they displayed it into us so,
being able to use this network tab
and sorta peer into what is happening,
what requests are being sent off to their server.
Is kinda cool.
And you feel like,
alittle bit of a hacker being able to
see the raw data behind everything.
That is network request.
Next one is break on attribute.
I don't use this one all that often,
but it can be helpful.
So right here I've got this button.
That when you click it it gets bigger.
Now if you go to your elements.
You'll see that the font size here is just being bumped up.
Every single time that I click it.
If you don't know like,
if you're just looking at this right now,
and your project has hundreds of javascript files,
and you go like okay,
where is the javascript that is making this button bigger?
You could spend your whole day
just reading through javascript.
Or what you can do is you can go into your
button and right click.
Then you can say break on,
and this is just another way of adding a break point.
But you can say break when somebody
has an attribute modification.
When somebody changes one of these attributes
throw in a breakpoint right there and
pause things from actually running.
So we can go ahead and break on,
there's also sub-tree modifications,
that means when somebody adds,
like a dev will look at that.
And there's also node removal
meaning when somebody removes a-
like an element or some text from something.
Let's just do attribute modification.
Then when I click it you see a pause
in the debugger.
You can see that there's a whole bunch of
information about what's going on here.
It gives me the new font size.
It gives me something called an Event.
We'll learn about all that,
as well as gives us the This keyword.
We'll learn all about that as well so,
I don't use that one all that often but
it's very helpful when you're being thrown
into a random code base that you don't really know...
What's going on.
Finally if you go to your sources tab again.
I'll just refresh this,
get outta the debugger here.
You'll see that there are other things here,
you can throw...
Event listener break points in there so,
is there like a click in here?
Mouse.
Click.
So break on mouse click.
And now if I just like,
I think if I click on there we go.
Clicked on that button right there.
And I just threw in a debugger break point for you.
And then I can just go ahead and take them.
So if you are trying to like,
figure out what's happening when,
you can throw in break points for when somebody clicks.
There's also XHR break points.
Which means that like,
you can-
you can click on this little one.
And just click escape and that will give you
any XHR or fetch.
What that will do is anytime a fetch request is made,
anytime someone goes off to an external API,
it will break.
So here if I fetch a dad joke.
You see that it pauses in the debugger,
and we can actually step through it.
Right now the joke is nothing.
But if I step.
Step again.
Here we go,
now the joke says "how does a dyslexic poet write?"
"Inverse."
So it's kinda cool to be able to do it.
You can do that on Apple.com as well.
Here let me show you.
Lets go to our sources tab.
Go to XHR break points.
Break on any XHR or fetch.
Now if I go ahead and search for something.
Lemme do "I",
you see as soon as I typed in "I",
it sent off that suggestion request to us.
And you'll see that we've now paused
it in debugger.
You can see the call stack.
Like look at this,
this is all of the functions that
Apple had to run in order to
fetch those suggestions for you.
It will also tell you some of the local
variables that are in there.
It'll tell you the closure.
We'll learn about that so,
sometimes this might be a little over your head.
But just know that we can throw in breakpoints
a whole bunch of different ways.
Breakpoints are a great way to pause
the actual value from running.
(phone rings)
I think that is it.
Yep that is it.
That's all the sort of,
the different debugging techniques
and tips that I use through it.
I personally I would say 98% of my debugging
is done both with console log,
breakpoints and network request.
And then the rest of those ones
being able to peer into scope,
attribute removal.
Those are handy in severe edge cases
Where I...
I sound like "huh this is really tough".
You just need to know about them so you can
look em up when you actually need them.
That's it,
let's get in the next one which is understanding scope.